# 2021-03-22



## Last week

- Concepts
  - Thread
  - Context
  - Context switch
  - Thread states
  
- Why have more than one thread?
  - Take advantage of multiple CPUs
  
- Why have more threads than CPUs?
  - Because threads may not always be in the ready state?
    - E.g. waiting for I/O
    - E.g. waiting for coordination with other threads

- Access to shared data by multiple threads
  - Identify when data is shared and when it isn't
    - Good knowledge of the memory "model" used by managed languages such as Java or C#.
      - Parameters, local variables, fields, value types, reference types
      - Stack and head

- How to create threads and synchronize with their termination

- Data sharing hazards examples
  - Data mixup
    - See https://github.blog/2021-03-18-how-we-found-and-fixed-a-rare-race-condition-in-our-session-handling/
  - Read-then-write
    - lost increments
  - Check-then-act
    - duplicate map insertions

- Three types of data sharing
  - No sharing - data confined to a single thread - thread confinment
  - Immutable data sharing
    - We will talk about this later in the course
  - Mutable data sharing
    - !Incorrect if access is not correctly synchronized

## Synchronization

### Data synchronization

- Mutual exclusion
  - Forbid more than one thread of "simultaneously" access the same data
  - Mutual exclusion using locks
  
- Lock
  - Data structure / object, designed to operate according to its specification even when used by multiple threads - thread safe
  - Two states
    - `available`
    - `acquired` (by a single thread)
  - Two operations
    - `acquire`: `available` -> `acquired`
      - non-ready state
    - `release`: `acquired` -> `available` 
    - Reentrant acquisition
      - `acquire` operation on a lock acquired by the requesting thread does succeed.
        - Reentrant acquires have an associated counter
      - Lock only goes to the `available` after an equivalent number of `release` operations.

- Using locks for mutual exclusion
  - Associate a `lock` *instance* to each shared data structure *instance*
  - `acquire` associated lock before *any* access to the data structure.
  - `release` lock after the access is completed.

- Mutual exclusion only works if every access follows this acquire-release protocol

- Works well with the encapsulation provided by object-oriented systems
  - Make data private
  - Operations over the data are done via public methods
    - These methods ensure the lock acquisition at the beggining and release at the end.

- In Java, every object has an associated lock - the intrinsic lock
  - This lock is acquired and released by using the `synchronized` block
  - Or by using the `synchronized` method modified
  

```java

List<String> list = new LinkedList<>()

(...)
synchronized(list) {
  ...
  list.add("value by one thread")
  ...
}
(...)
synchronized(list) {
  list.add("value by another thread")
}
```

```java

String s = "because a string is also an object"

List<String> list = new LinkedList<>()
(...)
synchronized(s) {
  ...
  list.add("value by one thread")
  ...
}
(...)
synchronized(s) {
  ...
  list.add("value by one thread")
  ...
}
```

This last use is not correct, because the protocol is not being followed - different locks are being acquired when accessing the data structure.
Using encapsulation helps avoid this type of error.

Since Java 5, there are also explicit locks - `Lock` interface

### Control synchronization

- Monitor concept
  - Data synchronization via locks and mutual exclusion
  - Control synchronization via wait "points" **coordinated** with mutual exclusion